# What's next?

By now, everything is in place in terms of authentication and user management for your application. You could continue to implement your own domain logic. I am keen to see what you are implementing on top of this authentication boilerplate for Firebase in React, so don't hesitate to reach out to me.

You have started to implement your first entity which is managed by the Firebase realtime database. You retrieve a list of these entities from the Firebase database and created single entities in the database too. You can extend it with further CRUD operations. In addition, you can start to implement your own domain specific entities (e.g. todo items in a ToDo application).

**There is one caveat you should keep in mind.** In the very beginning of this tutorial, it says that you will learn everything about the client-sided authentication in React in this guide. That's true in terms of using Firebase. But to be honest, that was only half of the story when it comes to your own authentication implementation without Firebase. If you would implement your own authentication backend (e.g. Passport.js in a Node.js server) from scratch, there are a couple of more topics that you would need to consider for the client-side application. For instance, when using Firebase, you can sign in to your application, close the browser tab, open it up again and you will see yourself still signed in to the application. Firebase keeps this information stored for you and the listener in your `withAuthentication()` higher order component knows about the authenticated user object. However, if you would implement your own authentication mechanism from scratch, you would have to use cookies or [the native local storage of the browser](https://www.robinwieruch.de/local-storage-react/) on the client-side to keep a user authenticated over multiple browser sessions. That's only one caveat to the story, but shows that implementing an own authentication solution from scratch can be a complex adventure.

So what's next for this tutorial? Often people are using React with a state management library such as Redux or MobX. **The following sections will showcase you how to implement the session state handling in MobX or Redux**. You can follow one of these sections to learn about it. **They will not build up on each other.** Instead, both use this section as their boilerplate to continue with their implementation. However, keep two things in mind when you continue with one of these solutions:

* It works in plain React as well. So [if you don't have any good reason to introduce Redux or MobX](https://www.robinwieruch.de/learn-react-before-using-redux/), consider to keep it like it is right now.

* This tutorial used the learnings from [The Road to learn React](https://www.robinwieruch.de/the-road-to-learn-react/) as foundation. The same applies for the next chapters and the course: [Taming the State in React](https://roadtoreact.com/course-details?courseId=TAMING_THE_STATE). It is full of useful information about Redux and MobX and teaches state management in React from scratch by building applications along the way. So it is highly recommended to learn at least the basics about Redux or MobX from the course.