# Introduction

**Note:** The book is WIP and thus you may find a couple of TODO annotations along the way. Furthermore, it is a **one to one** copied version from [my website](https://www.robinwieruch.de/complete-firebase-authentication-react-tutorial) to make it accessible for readers in PDF, EPUB and MOBI formats. There is no formatting regarding the wording made yet (e.g. it mentions "tutorial" or "article" here, but it should be "book"; it mentions "section", but it should be "chapter"). Furthermore, there is no proper book foreword or outline in the end of the book. Nevertheless, I am curious if you like the draft of the book so far. If there is enough interest in it, and people will buy it as well, I would love to continue writing it to make it a comprehensive Firebase in React journey. Everything that follows now is the version taken from the website. If you find any potential improvements, [please open up Issues or Pull Requests on GitHub](https://github.com/rwieruch/the-road-to-react-with-firebase). If you feel any section needs more explanations, please open an Issue on GitHub too. I would very much appreciate your contribution to it.

The topic about authentication in React keeps popping up from time to time. When people approach me with this question, most often after they have learned React.js or any other SPA solution (Angular.js, Vue.js), I usually tell them to start out with Firebase. It is the simplest way to learn about the essential parts of authentication in React from a frontend perspective. You can learn about it without worrying about any backend implementations. Firebase handles it for you. By only learning about the authentication from one perspective, in the beginning, you keep the level of complexity low and thus keep yourself motivated to learn about it. Once you understand authentication from a client-perspective, you can continue to build your own authentication backend on the server-side.

Authentication can be a complex topic when learning about web development in general. The puristic frontend and backend implementation of an authentication mechanism can be quite overwhelming. How to handle the session on the client- and the server-side? If a RESTful server is stateless, where goes the session on the backend? What about cookies or the native session storage in the browser? Should Passport.js be used on the server-side? All these questions let you run in circles and you never start implementing. Therefore my advice: Take it step by step and use only Firebase in your React application in the beginning. The following tutorial gives you a complete walkthrough of how to use Firebase for authentication in React. [The outcome of it can be seen in a GitHub repository](https://react-firebase-authentication.wieruch.com/). It is not styled, but that's not what the tutorial is about. Instead, it implements a whole authentication flow in Firebase and React with you. The styling of the application is up to you.

In order to keep the guide updated, here is a list of the main node packages and their versions which are used in this tutorial.

* React 16
* React Router 4
* Firebase 4

Please help me out if the tutorial needs any updates in order to keep it reliable for other people learning about the topic as well. In general, don't hesitate to point out improvements in the comments or visit the article directly on GitHub to open issues or pull requests.

You may wonder that there is no word about MobX or Redux. Indeed, it could be used to manage the client-side state for the authenticated user. But it isn't necessary to use one of those libraries. React's local state is absolutely sufficient to handle the state for the authenticated user. I just wanted to point it out again, because **a lot of people associate authentication in React immediately with Redux or MobX. Yet the article will showcase it initially without using any of these state management libraries**. However, in the end, the article will show you as bonus how to upgrade your application using Redux or MobX for the session handling.